I'm gonna begin with a scary question
are we headed toward a future without
jobs the remarkable progress that we're
seeing in technologies like self-driving
cars has led to an explosion of interest
in this question but because it's
something that's been asked so many
times in the past maybe what we should
really be asking is whether this time is
really different the fear that
automation might displace workers and
potentially lead to lots of unemployment
goes back at a minimum 200 years to the
Luddite revolts in England and since
then this concern has come up again and
again I'm gonna guess that most of you
have probably never heard of the triple
revolutionary port but this was a very
prominent report it was put together by
a brilliant group of people it actually
included two Nobel laureates and this
report was presented to the President of
the United States and it argued that the
US was on the brink of economic and
social upheaval because industrial
automation was going to put millions of
people out of work now that report was
delivered to President Lyndon Johnson in
March of 1964 so that's now over 50
years and of course that hasn't really
happened and that's been the story again
and again this alarm has been raised
repeatedly but it's always been a false
alarm and because it's been a false
alarm it's led to a very conventional
way of thinking about this and that says
essentially that yes technology may
devastate entire industries it may wipe
out whole occupations and types of work
but at the same time of course progress
is going to lead to entirely new things
so there will be new industries that
will arise in the future and those
industries of course will have to hire
people there'll be new kinds of work
that will appear and those might be
things that today we can't really even
imagine and that has been the story so
far and it's been a positive story it
turns out that the new jobs that have
been created have generally been a lot
better than the old ones they have for
example been more engaging they've been
in safer more
double work environments and of course
they've paid more so it has been a
positive story that's the way things
have played out so far but there is one
particular class of worker for whom the
story has been quite different and for
these workers technology has completely
decimated their work and it really
hasn't created any new opportunities at
all and these workers of course our
horses so I can ask a very provocative
question is it possible that at some
point in the future a significant
fraction of the human workforce is going
to be made redundant in the way that
horses were now you might have a very
visceral reflexive reaction to that you
might say that's absurd how can you
possibly compare human beings to horses
horses of course are very limited and
when cars and trucks and tractors came
along horses really had nowhere else to
turn people on the other hand are
intelligent we can learn we can adapt
and in theory that ought to mean that we
can always find something new to do and
if we can always remain relevant to the
future economy but here's the really
critical thing to understand the
machines that will threaten workers in
the future are really nothing like those
cars and trucks and tractors that
displaced horses the future is going to
be full of thinking learning adapting
machines and what that really means is
that technology is finally beginning to
encroach on that fundamental human
capability the thing that makes us so
different from horses and the very thing
that so far has allowed us to stay ahead
of the march of progress and remain
relevant and in fact indispensable to
the economy so what is it that is really
so different about today's information
technology relative to what we've seen
in the past I would point to three
fundamental things and the first thing
is that of course we have seen this
ongoing process of exponential
acceleration now I know you all know
about Moore's law but in fact it's more
broad-based than that it extends in many
cases for example to software it extends
to communications bandwidth and so forth
but the really key thing to understand
is that this acceleration has now been
going on for a really long time in fact
it's been going on for decades if you
measure from the late 1950s when the
first integrated circuits were
fabricated we've seen something on the
order of 30 doublings in computational
power since then now that's just an
extraordinary number of times to double
any quantity and what it really means is
that we're now at a point where we're
gonna see just an extraordinary amount
of absolute progress and of course
things are going to continue to also
accelerate from this point so as we look
forward to the coming years and decades
I think that means that we're gonna see
things that we're really not prepared
for we're gonna see things that astonish
us the second key thing is that the
machines are in a limited sense
beginning to think and by this I don't
mean human-level AI or science-fiction
artificial intelligence I simply mean
that machines and algorithms are making
decisions they're solving problems and
most importantly they're learning in
fact if there is one technology that is
truly central to this and has really
become the driving force behind this
it's machine learning which is just
becoming this incredibly powerful
disruptive scalable technology one of
the best examples I've seen if that
recently was what google's deepmind
division was able to do with its alphago
system now this is the system that was
able to beat the best player in the
world at the ancient game of go now at
least to me there are two things that
really stand out about the game of go
one is that as you're playing the game
the number of configurations that the
board can be in is essentially infinite
there are actually more possibilities
than there are atoms in the universe so
what that means is that you're never
going to be able to build a computer to
win at the game of grow the way chess
was approached for example which is
basically to throw brute force
computational power at it so clearly a
much more sophisticated thinking like
approach is needed the second thing that
really stands out is that if you talk to
one of the championship goal players
this person cannot necessarily even
really articulate what exactly it is
they're thinking about as they play the
game it's often something that's very
intuitive it's almost just like a
feeling
about which move they should make so
given those two qualities I would say
that playing go at a world-champion
level really ought to be something
that's safe from automation and the fact
that it isn't should really raise a
cautionary flag for us and the reason is
that we tend to draw a very distinct
line and on one side of that line are
all the jobs and tasks that we perceive
as being on some level fundamentally
routine and repetitive and predictable
and we know that these jobs might be in
different industries they might be in
different occupations and at different
skill levels but because they are
innately predictable we know that
they're probably at some point going to
be susceptible to machine learning and
therefore to automation and make no
mistake that's a lot of jobs that's
probably something on the order of
roughly half the jobs in the economy but
then on the other side of that line we
have all the jobs that require some
capability that we perceive as being
uniquely human and these are the jobs
that we think are safe now based on what
I know about the game of Go I would have
guessed that it really ought to be on
the safe side of that line but the fact
that it isn't and that Google solved
this problem suggests that that line is
going to be very dynamic it's going to
shift and it's going to shift in a way
that consumes more and more jobs and
tasks that we currently perceive as
being safe from automation the other key
thing to understand is this is by no
means just about low-wage jobs or
blue-collar jobs or jobs and tasks done
by people that have relatively low
levels of education there's lots of
evidence to show that these technologies
are rapidly climbing the skills ladder
so we already see an impact on
professional jobs tasks done by people
like accountants financial analysts
journalists lawyers radiologists and so
forth so a lot of the assumptions that
we make about the kinds of occupations
and tasks and jobs that are going to be
threatened by automation in the future
are very likely to be challenged going
forward so as we put these trends
together I think what it shows is that
we could very well end up in a future
with significant unemployment or at a
minimum we could face lots of
underemployment or stagnant wages maybe
even declining wages
and of course soaring levels of
inequality now all of that of course is
going to put a terrific amount of stress
on the fabric of society but beyond that
there is also a fundamental economic
problem and that arises because jobs are
currently the primary mechanism that
distributes income and therefore
purchasing power to all the consumers
that buy the products and services that
we're producing in order to have a
vibrant market economy you've got to
have lots and lots of consumers that are
really capable of buying the products
and services they're being produced if
you don't have that then you run the
risk of economic stagnation or maybe
even a declining economic spiral as
there simply aren't enough customers out
there to buy the products and services
being produced it's really important to
realise that all of us as individuals we
lie on access to that market economy in
order to be successful you can visualize
that by thinking in terms of one really
exceptional person imagine for a moment
do you take say see Steve Jobs and you
drop him on an island all by himself now
on that Island he's gonna be running
around gathering coconuts just like
anyone else he's really not going to be
anything special and the reason of
course is that there is no market for
him to scale his incredible talents
across so access to this market is
really critical to us as individuals and
also to the entire system in terms of it
being sustainable so the question then
becomes what exactly could we do about
this and I think you can view this
through a very utopian framework you can
imagine a future where we all have to
work less we have more time for leisure
more time to spend with our families
more time to do things that we find
genuinely rewarding and so forth
and I think that's a terrific vision
that's something that we should
absolutely strive to move toward but at
the same time I think we have to be
realistic and we have to realize that
we're very likely to face a significant
income distribution problem a lot of
people are likely to be left behind and
I think that in order to solve that
problem we're ultimately going to have
to find a way to deep
incomes from traditional work and the
best most straightforward way I know to
do that
is some kind of a guaranteed income or
universal basic income now basic income
is becoming a very important idea is
getting a lot of traction and attention
there are a lot of important pilot
projects and experiments going on
throughout the world my own view is that
a basic income is not a panacea it's not
necessarily a plug-and-play solution but
rather it's a place to start it's an
idea that we can build on and refine for
example one thing that I have written
quite a lot about is the possibility of
incorporating explicit incentives into a
basic income to illustrate that imagine
that you are a struggling high school
student imagine you are at risk of
dropping out of school and yet suppose
you know that at some point in the
future no matter what you're gonna get
the same basic income as everyone else
now to my mind that creates a very
perverse incentive for you to simply
give up and drop out of school so I
would say let's not structure things
that way instead let's pay people who
graduate from high school somewhat more
than those who simply drop out and we
can take that idea of building
incentives into a basic income and maybe
extend it to other areas for example you
might create an incentive to work in the
community to help others or perhaps to
do positive environment or positive
things for the environment and so forth
so by incorporating incentives into a
basic income we might actually improve
it and also perhaps take at least a
couple of steps toward faith towards
solving another problem that I think
we're quite possibly going to face in
the future and that is how do we all
find meaning and fulfilment and how do
we occupy our time in a world where
perhaps there's less demand for
traditional work so by extending and
refining a basic income I think we can
make it look better and we can also
perhaps make it more politically and
socially acceptable and feasible and of
course by doing that we increase the
odds that it will actually come to be I
think one of the most kind of
fundamental almost instinctive
objections too many of us have to the
idea of a basic income or really to any
significant expansion
the safety net is this fear that we're
gonna end up with too many people riding
in the economic cart and not enough
people pulling that cart and yet really
the whole point I'm making here of
course is that in the future machines
are increasingly going to be capable of
pulling that cart for us that should
give us more options for the way we
structure our society and our economy
and I think that eventually it's going
to go beyond simply being an option and
it's going to become an imperative and
the reason of course is that all of this
is going to put such a degree of stress
on our society and also because jobs are
that mechanism that gets purchasing
power to consumers so that they can then
drive the economy if in fact that
mechanism begins to erode in the future
then we're going to need to replace it
with something else or we're gonna face
the risk that our whole system simply
may not be sustainable but the bottom
line here is that I really think that
solving these problems and especially
finding a way to build a future economy
that works for everyone at every level
of our society is going to be most one
of the most important challenges that we
all face in the coming years and decades
thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]